# Creating a new migration

After the PyCDS ORM has been modified, you will almost certainly want to create an Alembic migration script to enable existing databases to be upgraded to the new model.

The easiest and likely most reliable way to create a migration script is to autogenerate it using Alembic. For more details, see the [Alembic documentation](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html).

To autogenerate a migration script, you must have a reference database schema for Alembic to compare to the modified PyCDS ORM. After Alembic autogenerates the script, you must edit it to ensure completeness, correctness, and that it respects the specified schema name (see instructions below).

Instructions:

1. Choose or create a reference database schema that is at the latest migration. (Or a database schema at an otherwise desired "base" migration, which is unusual but not necessarily wrong.)
   To serve as a reference, a schema need not contain any data.

1. If the reference database is not named in `alembic.ini`, create an entry there for it of the form

   ```ini
   [<db-label>]
   sqlalchemy.url = postgresql://<user-name>@<server-name>/<db-name>
   ```

1. Autogenerate the migration script:

    ```shell script
    [PYCDS_SCHEMA_NAME=<schema name>] alembic -x db=<db-label> revision --autogenerate -m "<message>"
    ```

   Notes:
   - `PYCDS_SU_ROLE_NAME` is not required for this operation.
   - The `<message>` should be a succinct description of what the migration accomplishes; for example "Add name column to Users". This message becomes part of the name and content of the script.

1. Alembic writes a new script to the directory `alembic/versions`. Its name includes a unique revision identifier (a SHA) and a version of `<message>`.

1. Review and edit the script to ensure correctness, completeness, and that it respects the specified schema name. Specifically:

   1. There are (still) significant differences between the CRMP schema and this ORM. Expect to remove or alter many of the autogenerated operations.

   2. Review to ensure that it picks up all changes to tables and implements them appropriately.
      In particular, Alembic does not pick up on changes of table or column name, which must be manually converted from "drop old name, add new name" to "rename". Some other schema changes are also not detected.

   3. For more information, see [What does Autogenerate Detect (and what does it not detect?)](https://alembic.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/autogenerate.html#what-does-autogenerate-detect-and-what-does-it-not-detect).

   4. Manually add creation or dropping of the following things not handled by Alembic autogenerate:
      1. Functions
      1. Views
      1. Materialized views

   5. **Ensure that all changes respect the specified schema name** that the user will supply when this migration is applied. In particular:
      1. Replace any autogenerated schema name usage (e.g., `schema='crmp'`) with the specified schema name (`schema=pycds.get_schema_name()`).
      1. Ensure the specified schema name is used for functions, views and materialized views. This should come without special effort due to the structure of how these items are declared, but it is worth verifying.

   6. Do this for both upgrade and downgrade functions in the script!

1. Write some tests for the migration. Examples can be found in the existing code.

1. Commit the new migration script and its tests to the repo.

